---
title: Working with contacts and collisions
slug: physics-contact-collisions
---

Next you'll learn how to setup the physics body *Contact Masks* and use that knowledge 
to remove seals when they are hit by penguins, ice blocks or even each other.

Before we continue let's clarify some terminology. 

**Categories** 

Categories refer to different groups of objects. In your game Penguins, Ice Blocks, 
and Seals would be different categories. We need to know when Peguins and Ice Blocks 
hit Seals. 

**Contact**

Contact refers to two physics objects making contact. A contact does NOT represent a
physical insteaction! In other words you can create two objects that pass through 
each other but produce a contact when they overlap. 

We might want to know when Penguins, or Ice Blocks contact a Seal.

**Collision** 

Collision refers to a physical interaction between objects. Objects that show physical 
interactions stop, bounce, and knock each other around. 

Our game needs collisions between Penguins, Ice Blocks, Ground, Seals, and Catapult Arm. 

# The Physics contact delegate

In the course of playing contactc between some of the objects is meaningful. For example
when an Ice Block or a Penguin hits a Seal we want to know. If the collision is hard
enough we want to remove the Seal. 

A contact is a message letting us know that two objects made contact. 

In SpriteKit you can do this by implementing the *SKPhysicsContactDelegate*. Let's add 
this protocol to the *GameScene* class, so you can get information on the collision 
going on the game.

> [action]
> Modify the GameScene class decleration implement the *SKPhysicsContactDelegate*:
>
```
class GameScene: SKScene, SKPhysicsContactDelegate {
```
>

Now that you've adopted the contact delegate protocol, you need to sign up to receive 
events generated by the contact delegate.

> [action]
> Add this code to `didMove(to view:)`:
>
```
/* Set physics contact delegate */
physicsWorld.contactDelegate = self
```
>

# Physics masks

Bit masks are numbers where each bit in the number acts as a switch. Computers keep 
track of numbers using bits. An 8 bit number is made up 8 bits. Which you can picture as:

- 00000000

That would be 0. 

- 00000000 = 0
- 00000001 = 1
- 00000010 = 2
- 00000011 = 3
- 00000100 = 4
- 00000101 = 5

As 32 bit numbers they would look like this: 

- 0 = 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000
- 1 = 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000001
- 2 = 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000010
- 3 = 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000011
- 4 = 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000100
- 5 = 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000101
- 6 = 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000110
- 7 = 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000111
- 8 = 00000000 00000000 00000000 00001000

The physics system used in SpriteKit uses 32 bit numbers to manage physics categories, 
contacts, and collisions. This allows you to create many different kinds of interactions 
between objects in the games you create.

# Category Bitmask

Each *physicsBody* has a property called *categoryBitMask*. This *categoryBitMask* is used
to identify different categories of physics objects. Categories might be things like: 

- 00000000 = 0 None - use this for objects that do not interact with other objects
- 00000001 = 1 Penguin - use this for peguins we fling
- 00000010 = 2 Seal - Use this for Seals 
- 00000100 = 4 Ice Block - Use this Ice blocks
- 00001000 = 8 Ground - This identifies the ground

Categories should usually be numbers with only a single 1 bit! Notice each of the numebrs
above are 1, 2, 4, 8. We skipped 3 (00000011) which would represent the same category as
Penguin 1 (00000001) and Seal 2 (00000010). 

## Contact Bitmask 

A contact bit mask says which categories produce a message when they make contact. For 
example an object with a `contactBitmask` of 3 (00000011) would produce a message when 
it hit an object with a category of 1 (00000001) or 2 (00000010). 

- 00000001
- 00000010
- 00000011 <- Shares the first and second bit with 1 and 2. 

## Collision Bitmask

The `collisionBitmask` determines which objects show physical interaction. Set the bits 
to 1 for each category of object that **collides** with another object. For example
Penguins collide with Seals, Ice Blocks, and the Ground. 

- 000000001 = 1 = Penguin category
- 000000010 = 2 = Seal category
- 000000100 = 4 = Ice Block category
- 000001000 = 8 = Ground category
- 000001110 = 14 = Peguin collision bitmask

Penguin collision = Seal + Ice Block + Ground = 2 + 4 + 8 = 14

Notice that Penguins don't collide with other Penguins! If Penguins need to collide with 
other Penguins their `collisionBitMask` would be:

Penguin collision = Penguin + Seal + Ice Block + Ground = 1 + 2 + 4 + 8 = 15

## Bitwise operations 

Bitwise operations are math operations that applied at the binary, or bit, level. There
Two operations that we need to work with. 

### Bitwise AND &

When combing two binary numbers with a bitwise AND we compare each bit if BOTH bits are 1, 
then that bit in the answer is 1. Think about it like this. For each bit in the same 
column, if the bit on top is 1 AND the bit on the bottom is 1, then that bit in the answer 
is 1. Here is an example:

```
  00000000
& 00000010
= 00000000

  00000011
& 00000010
= 00000010

  00000011
& 00000010
= 00000010
```

### Bitwise OR |

A bitwise OR operation compares the bit in each column. If the bit in either column is 1
then the answer is 1. Here is an examples: 

```
  00000000
| 00000010
= 00000010

  00000011
| 00000010
= 00000011

  00000011
| 00000100
= 00000111
```

You remember that you setup the penguin with a **Category Mask** of `1` and the seal 
with `2`. When a collision takes place you will be checking the *categoryBitMask* for a 
value of `2` to identify when a seal has been involved in a collision.

By default SpriteKit will not inform you of any collisions, I'm sure you've spotted the 
*Contact Mask* property when setting up physics bodies.  By default they are all `0` so 
our *contactDelegate* will never be informed of any collisions taking place.

This use case is pretty straightforward, if **anything** collides with a seal (even seal 
on seal) you want to be informed.

> [action]
> Open *Seal.sks* and click on the seal, set *Contact Mask* to `1`.

Now anytime a seal is involved in a collision you will be informed through the contact 
delegate.

# Implementing a delegate method

You will need to implement the *beginContact(...)* delegate method that will inform you of any valid collision contacts.

> [action]
> Add this method to the *GameScene* class:
>
```
func didBegin(_ contact: SKPhysicsContact) {
    /* Physics contact delegate implementation */
    /* Get references to the bodies involved in the collision */
    let contactA:SKPhysicsBody = contact.bodyA
    let contactB:SKPhysicsBody = contact.bodyB
    /* Get references to the physics body parent SKSpriteNode */
    let nodeA = contactA.node as! SKSpriteNode
    let nodeB = contactB.node as! SKSpriteNode
    /* Check if either physics bodies was a seal */
    if contactA.categoryBitMask == 2 || contactB.categoryBitMask == 2 {
       print("Seal Hit")
    }
}
```
>

Run your game...

You should see the log message appear in the console every time a seal is hit.  You may 
notice you a few seal hits at the start, currently this code is super sensitive, the act 
of adding *Level1.sks* to the scene will mostly generate a contact event as the seal 
gently touches the ground when they are first added to the scene.

# Destroying Seals

Now that you know that the collision handler is working, let's implement the real 
functionality. What you want is a way to check how hard the seal was hit and use that to 
decided if you should ignore the collision or destroy the seal.  

SpriteKit to the rescue, you can utilize the *collisionImpulse* property of the collision 
to gauge the resulting impact force from the collision.

To keep things clean let's setup a separate seal removal method. You'll be adding more 
functionality to this method later.

> [action]
> Replace:
>
```
print("Seal Hit")
```
>
> with:
>
```
/* Was the collision more than a gentle nudge? */
if contact.collisionImpulse > 2.0 {
>
    /* Kill Seal(s) */
    if contactA.categoryBitMask == 2 { dieSeal(node: nodeA) }
    if contactB.categoryBitMask == 2 { dieSeal(node: nodeB) }
}
```
>

## Removing the seal

First you retrieve the collision impulse between the seal and the other object. If this 
impulse is large enough you decide to remove the seal by using the *dieSeal* method.

> [action]
> Add the *dieSeal* method to your *GameScene* class:
>
```
func dieSeal(node: SKNode) {
   /* Seal death*/
>
   /* Create our hero death action */
   let sealDeath = SKAction.run({
        /* Remove seal node from scene */
        node.removeFromParent()
    })
    self.run(sealDeath)
}
```
>

This code should be fairly familiar, yet one does not simply call`removeFromParent()` 
directly...

In the physics simulation you need to ensure that the seal is removed at the right time, 
in the SpriteKit frame render cycle there is a **post-physics** step called 
*didSimulatePhysics* after the physics simulation is complete for the current frame. 
At this point it's safe to remove a physics body, otherwise you can run into problems 
with triggering collisions on bodies that have been removed, resulting in a horrible 
game crash.  If you wrap this in an *SKAction*, SpriteKit will ensure it's executed at 
the right time in the render cycle.

# Summary

The game mecanic is nearly finished, you've learned to:

- Implement the physics *SKPhysicsContactDelegate*
- Using the **categoryBitMask** to identify physics bodies in a collision
- Using **SKPhysicsContact** to evaluate the collision force between two bodies
- Removing the seal cleanly from the scene

In the next chapter it's time to add a little polish.
